# Introduction to Azure fundamentals

This is the first chapter of the online Microsoft Azure Fundamentals course.

## What is cloud computing?

- You pay only for the cloud services you use, which lead to:
  - Lower operating costs.
  - Running your infrastructure more efficiently.
  - Scale as your business needs change.

- There are several benefits of using the cloud environment:
  - **High availability**: Depending on your service-level agreement (SLA), there is little to no downtime.
  - **Scalability**: Scaling applications can be done in two ways:
    - *Vertical*: Adding more RAM or CPU's to the vm.
    - *Horizontal*: Adding more vms to the mix.
- **Elasticity**: Applications can use autoscaling so they will always have enough resources.
- **Agility**: Cloud-based resources can be deployed and configured quickly when your application requirements change.
- **Geo-distribution**: Applications and data can be deployed through regional datacenters around the world.
- **Disaster recovery**: By taking advantage of the points above, you can deploy with confidence that data will be safe on a disaster.

- There are multiple service models that define levels of shared responsibility that a cloud provider and cloud tenant are responsible for:
  - **IaaS** (infrastructure as a service). It aims to give you complete control over the hardware that runs your application.
    - *No CapEx*. Users have no up-front costs.
    - *Agility*. Applications can be made accessible quickly, and deprovisioned whenever needed.
    - *Management*. The shared responsibility model applies; the user manages and maintains the services they have provisioned, and the cloud provider manages and maintains the cloud infrastructure.
    - *Consumption-based model*. Organizations pay only for what they use and operate under an Operational Expenditure (OpEx) model.
    - *Skills*. No deep technical skills are required to deploy, use, and gain the benefits of a public cloud. Organizations can use the skills and expertise of the cloud provider to ensure workloads are secure, safe, and highly available.
    - *Cloud benefits*. Organizations can use the skills and expertise of the cloud provider to ensure workloads are made secure and highly available.
    - *Flexibility*. IaaS is the most flexible cloud service because you have control to configure and manage the hardware running your application.
  - **PaaS** (platform as a service). Has almost the same benefits as IaaS.
    - *Productivity*. Users can focus on application development only, because the cloud provider handles all platform management.
  - **SaaS** (software as a service). Again almost the same benefits as IaaS, but still has a few tricks on it's own:
    - *Pay-as-you-go pricing model*. Users pay for the software they use on a subscription model, typically monthly or yearly, regardless of how much they use the software.*Flexibility*. Users can access the same application data from anywhere.

- All platforms also have their disadvantages:
  - **IaaS** can be very expensive and you should only use it if there is no other option.
  - **PaaS** has platform limitations because we are letting Azure manage that.
  - **SaaS** has software limitations because you don't control it.

- Serverless computing enables developers to build applications faster by eliminating the need for them to manage the infrastructure.
  - They only use resources when a specific function or trigger occurs (like running on low RAM).
  - The term  "Serverless" is more a less derived from not focussing on the server but instead delivering business value.

- Deployment models for cloud computing:
  - **Public cloud**: Services are offered over the public internet and available to anyone who wants to purchase them (for example Azure).
  - **Private cloud**: Computing resources are used exclusively by users from one business or organization (for example an on-premise server).
  - **Hybrid cloud**: Combines a public cloud and a private cloud by allowing data and applications to be shared between them (for example Azure Stack).

## Understanding Capital expenses vs. operating expenses

There are two different types of expenses that you should consider:

- **Capital Expenditure (CapEx)** is the up-front spending of money on physical infrastructure, and then deducting that up-front expense over time. The up-front cost from CapEx has a value that reduces over time.
- **Operational Expenditure (OpEx)** is spending money on services or products now, and being billed for them now. You can deduct this expense in the same year you spend it. There is no up-front cost, as you pay for a service or product as you use it.

CapEx requires significant up-front financial costs, as well as ongoing maintenance and support expenditures (the case with purchasing your own hardware etc.). By contrast, OpEx is a consumption-based model (like using services within Azure).

## What is Azure?

- Azure uses virtualization to separate the tight coupling between a computer's hardware and its OS by using a hypervisor.
  - The hypervisor emulates all the functions of a real machine and its CPU in a VM.
  - Each server rack in an Azure warehouse uses the hypervisor to run emulation on all the machines.
  - You can interact with all of this by using the Azure API (also known as the Azure Portal)
  - The Azure portal doesn't have any downtime for maintenance.
  - The Azure Marketplace helps connect users with Microsoft partners, independent software vendors, and startups that are offering their solutions and services, which are optimized to run on Azure.

## Tour of Azure services

- These are the most commonly used categories within Azure:
  - **Compute**: Provides a range of options for hosting applications and services.
  - **Networking**: Networking functionality in Azure includes a range of options to connect the outside world to services and features in the global Azure datacenters.
  - **Storage**: Storage services have several common characteristics:
    - Durable and highly available with redundancy and replication.
    - Secure through automatic encryption and role-based access control.
    - Scalable with virtually unlimited storage.
    - Managed, handling maintenance and any critical problems for you.
    - Accessible from anywhere in the world over HTTP or HTTPS.
  - **Mobile**: Includes features like:
    - Offline data synchronization
    - Connectivity to on-premises data.
    - Broadcasting push notifications.
    - Autoscaling to match business needs.
  - **Databases**: Provides multiple database services to store a wide variety of data types and volumes. And with global connectivity, this data is available to users instantly.
  - **Web**: Includes first-class support to build and host web apps and HTTP-based web services.
  - **IoT**: Smart computers and all.
  - **Big Data**: We are talking about data like from weather reports and all.
  - **AI**: Machine learning is a data science technique that allows computers to use existing data to forecast future behaviors, outcomes, and trends.
  - **DevOps**: DevOps brings together people, processes, and technology by automating software delivery to provide continuous value to your users.

## Get started with Azure accounts
  
- An Azure free account includes:
  - Free access to popular Azure products for 12 months.
  - A credit to spend for the first 30 days.
  - Access to more than 25 products that are always free.
