# Azure Fundamentals part 2: Describe core Azure services

This is the second chapter of the online Microsoft Azure Fundamentals course.

## Explore Azure database and analytics services

In this module, you'll learn how to take advantage of several virtualization services in Azure compute, which can help your applications scale out quickly and efficiently to meet increasing demands.

### Different databases and points

- **Azure Cosmos DB**: Globally distributed, multi-model database service.
Supports schema-less data, which lets you build highly responsive and "Always On" applications. It stores data in atom-record-sequence (ARS) format what will be abstracted and projected as an API. Choose between SQL, MongoDb, Cassandra, ...

- **Azure SQL Database**: Relational database based on the latest stable version of Microsoft SQL Server database engine. It's a platform as a service (PAAS) database engine that handles all the management stuff like upgrading and patching while having 99.99 percent availability. It can process relational data and non-relational structures like graphs, JSON, etc. Using Azure Database Migration Service, there will be minimal downtime to help you to the cloud.

- **Azure SQL Managed Instance**: an upgraded version of Azure SQL Databases. While Azure SQL Databases can only use the default SQL_Latin1_General_CP1_CI_AS server collation, Azure SQL Managed Instance can do more (like Cyrillic characters).

- **MySQL**: Used for the LAMP stack (Linux, Apache, MySQL PHP). For when you want to host your MySQL server in Azure, this is now also possible. Also can make use of the Azure Database Migration Service for minimal downtime deployments.

- **PostgreSQL**: Also a relational database server inside the cloud. Has two deployment options: "Single Server" and "Hyperscale (Citus)". Single server has three options: Basic, General Purpose and Memory Optimized. Hyperscale will use horizontal scaling (multiple machines) by using sharding. It will parallelize incoming SQL queries for faster responses on larger datasets. Can mostly be used for applications with a high workload like 100 GB of data.

### Different big data and analytics

- **Azure Synapse Analytics**: a limitless analytics service that brings together enterprise data warehousing and big data analytics. Query and manage data for BI and machine learning.

- **Azure HDInsight**: a fully managed, open-source analytics service for enterprises:
  - Easier, faster and cost-effective to process massive amounts of data.
  - Frameworks to use are like Apache spark, Apache Haddop, etc.
  - Also includes ETL, data warehousing, machine learning and IoT.

- **Azure Databricks**: helps to unlock insights from all your data and build artificial intelligence solutions:
  - Uses Apache Spark.
  - Supports Python, Scala, R, Java and SQL with other libraries.

- **Azure Data Lake Analytics**: an on-demand analytics job service that simplifies big data.
  - Can set total power to handle any job at any scale.

---

Extra notes on databases:

- The migration process flow for databases is as follows:
  - Discover: Scan the network to identify all SQL Server instances and features used by your organization.
  - Assess: Assess any on-premises SQL Server instance(s) that can be migrated to Azure SQL Managed Instance to identify migration blockers or compatibility issues.
  - Migrate: Follow the steps to migrate your data to the new instances.
  - Backup and restore: Backup to Azure Storage to prevent data loss.

---

## Explore Azure compute services

Compute services (Azure compute) are on-demand computing service for running cloud-based applications. The most notable are:

### Virtual machine scale sets

In short, they are software emulations of physical computers.
Basically used when you want total control over the environment:

- Total control over the OS
- The ability to run custom software.
- To use custom hosting configurations.

When to use it:

- During testing and development.
- Running applications in the cloud.
- Extending datacenters to the cloud.
- Disaster recovery.
- Moving VMs to the cloud

Scaling is an important factor when using VMs:

- **Virtual machine scale sets**: Build and manage a group of identical, load-balanced VMs.
- **Azure Batch**: Large scale parallel high-performance computing (HPC) batch jobs to scale a lot Vms. Basically does all the stuff you want when needed. This includes starting a pool of VMs and scaling it down when work completes.

### Containers and Kubernetes

A container is a lightweight, virtualized application environment that can be created quickly, scales out and stopped dynamically. This is a better alternative when scaling your application instead of VMs.

There are two ways that can manage both Docker and Microsoft-based containers in Azure:

- **Azure Containers**: A platform as a service where you can easily run a container without additional services.
- **Azure Kubernetes Service**: An orchestration service that can help automating, managing and interacting with a large number of containers.

---

Note, containers are most helpful when using microservices.

---

### App Service

Build, deploy and scale enterprise-grade web, mobile and API apps running on any platform.
This is a platform as a service (PaaS) offering, so Azure handles the infrastructure to run and scale the web applications.

It's possible to host the most common app services like:

- **Web apps**: Using windows or linux to host applications.
- **API apps**: Swagger supported APIs.
- **WebJobs**: Run programs or scripts scheduled or by a trigger.
- **Mobile apps**: Build the backend for IOS and Android apps.

The service also handles infrastructure decisions like:

- Deployment and management.
- Secure endpoints.
- Autoscaling.
- Built-in load balancer.

### Functions

Used when you only want code running. Mostly used for responding on an event (often via REST), timer or message from another Azure service.

Functions contain the following terms:

- **Abstraction of servers**: The platform manages all the server stuff for you.
- **Event-driven scale**: Responds to incoming events like a timer, http, queues and more.
- **Micro-billing**: Pay for the time the code runs.

Two ways of server-less computing:

- **Azure Functions**: Use it when you're only concerned by the code running and not the underlying platform or infrastructure. They can be implemented stateless (acting like a restart every time) or stateful (Durable functions: receiving a context to track prior activity).

- **Azure Logic Apps**: While Azure functions execute code, Azure Logic Apps execute workflows that can be used to automate business scenarios with predefined logic blocks. An example of this is for a ticket inside Zendesk:
  - Detect intent of the message.
  - Create ticket.
  - Add the customer.
  - Send follow-up email.

In short, the difference between the two options is:

- With Functions, you write code to complete each step.
- With Logic Apps, you use a GUI to define the actions and how they relate to one another.

### Windows Virtual Desktop

Windows Virtual Desktop on Azure is a desktop and application virtualization service that runs on the cloud. It can be used to provide the best user experience and it enhances security:

- Everyone can connect to it if they have internet access.
- Multifactor authentication and RBAC is available because of Azure Active Directory
- More secure then RDP because they don't open inbound ports to the session host VMs.

It has also some key features:

- **Simplified management** if the Azure administrators are used to Azure AD and RBAC. But it can also for example automate, update and provide disaster recovery for VMs.
- **Performance management** by making use of different Azure options. These include Host pools (collection of VMs with the same configuration assigned to multiple users). Also using Breadth mode users are sequentially allocated across the host pool for your workload. Combine this with load balancing and your set.
- **Windows Virtual Desktop** lets you use Windows 10 Enterprise multi-session, the only Windows client-based operating system that enables multiple concurrent users on a single VM.

If you want to use it, you can:

- Bring your own licencees. You'll only need to pay for the Azure resources.
- Just pay lol.

## Explore Azure Storage services

- **Azure storage** is a service for storing files messages, tables and other types of information. To use the Azure Storage service, you'll need a storage account. This provides an unique namespace for your Azure Storage data. Disk storage is providing disks for Azure virtual machines.There are different levels of disks, like (premium) SSDs and HDDs.

- **Azure blob storage** is an object storage solution for the cloud that can hold massive amounts of data such as text and binary data. Because it's unstructured, it doesn't have restrictions on data it can hold.
It's ideal for storing large unstructured data like videos (that can also be streamed), backups, archiving, analytics for Azure, etc.

- **Azure files** is a fully managed file share in the cloud that is accessible via the industry standard Server Message Block and Network File System (preview) protocols. It's useful for on-premise file shares that a user can mount. Because you can reach it by URL, it has to have the Shared Access Signature (SAS): <https://storagesample.blob.core.windows.net/sample-container/sampleBlob.txt?sv=2021-07-08&sig=alkjfeaonfoh3o309afdi90ajkf>

  For storage there are different tiers that will determine your price and functionality:

  - *Hot access tier*: Optimized for storing data that is accessed frequently (for example, images for your website).
  - *Cool access tier*: Optimized for data that is infrequently accessed and stored for at least 30 days (for example, invoices for your customers).
  - *Archive access tier*: Appropriate for data that is rarely accessed and stored for at least 180 days, with flexible latency requirements (for example, long-term backups).

  Consider the following for storage tiers:

  - Hot and cool can be set at account levels
  - Hot, cool and archive can be set when setting the blob
  - Cool has a lower availability service-level agreement (SLA).
  - Archive takes data offline and offers the lowest storage costs, but also the highest costs to rehydrate and access data.

## Explore Azure networking services

- Azure virtual networks enable Azure resources, to communicate with each other, with users on the internet, and with your on-premises client computers.
Azure virtual networks include:

  - **Isolation and segmentation**: isolates virtual networks by using either public or private IP ranges
  - **Internet communications**: setup public IP or public load balancer
  - **Communicate between Azure resources**: Connect between VMs and other Azure resources. Also use service endpoints to connect between types like Azure SQL database and storage accounts.
  - **Communicate with on-premises resources**: Link resources together to create a network that spans both your local and cloud environments. This can be done with Point-to-site VPNs (for example a vpn connection to0 connect to the Azure virtual network), Site-to-site VPNs (for example an on-premises VPN device to the Azure VPN gateway) and Azure ExpressRoute (premium VPN service)
  - **Route network traffic**: Define routing inside the virtual network. This can be done with Route tables (defining rules how to direct traffic) and Border Gateway Protocol (propagate on-premise BGP routes to Azure virtual networks).
  - **Filter network traffic**: Filter using Network security groups (contains inbound/outbound rules for IP, port, protocol) and Network virtual appliances (carries out a particular network function such as a firewall or WAN optimization).

- By using network peering you can link networks together so they can communicate with each other (can be different regions). Using UDR (user-defined routing), network admins control the routing tables between subnets in a VNet as wel as between VNets.

- When creating a virtual network, you can set up the following important stuff (not counting all settings:
  - **Address space**: Define address spaces in Classless Interdomain Routing (CIDR) format. For example:
    - 10.0.0.0/24 gives 10.0.0.1 to 10.0.0.254
    - 10.1.0.0/16 gives 10.1.0.1 to 10.1.255.254
    - 10.0.0.0/8 gives 10.0.0.1 to 10.255.255.254 but overlap with the addresses from 10.0.0.0/24 so those can't be used
  - **Subnet**: You can create one or more subnets for a virtual network address space.
  - **Network security group**: Security rules that enable you to filter the type of network traffic that can flow in and out of virtual network subnets and network interfaces. Can be created outside the configuration.
  - **Route table**: Azure has a default one for you ready, but you create a separate one.

- VPNs are typically used to connect two or more trusted private networks to one another over an untrusted network (typically the public internet).
There are three connectivity types for the vpns:
  - Connect on-premises datacenters to virtual networks through a site-to-site connection.
  - Connect individual devices to virtual networks through a point-to-site connection.
  - Connect virtual networks to other virtual networks through a network-to-network connection.

- VPN gateways must choose one of the following VPN types:

  - **Policy-based** gateways specify statically the IP address of packets that should be encrypted through each tunnel. This type of device evaluates every data packet against those sets of IP addresses to choose the tunnel where that packet is going to be sent through. Some features:
    - Support for IKEv1 only.
    - Use of static routing, where combinations of address prefixes from both networks control how traffic is encrypted and decrypted through the VPN tunnel. The source and destination of the tunneled networks are declared in the policy and don't need to be declared in routing tables.
    - Policy-based VPNs must be used in specific scenarios that require them, such as for compatibility with legacy on-premises VPN devices.

  - **Route-based** gateways specify IPSec tunnels are modeled as a network interface or virtual tunnel interface. IP routing (either static routes or dynamic routing protocols) decides which one of these tunnel interfaces to use when sending each packet. This can be used for:
    - Connections between virtual networks
    - Point-to-site connections
    - Multisite connections
    - Coexistence with an Azure ExpressRoute gateway

    And have the following features:

    - Supports IKEv2
    - Uses any-to-any (wildcard) traffic selectors
    - Can use dynamic routing protocols, where routing/forwarding tables direct traffic to different IPSec tunnels

- Before deploying a VPN gateway, you'll need some resources:
  - A virtual network
  - A GatewaySubnet
  - A Public IP address
  - A Local network gateway
  - A Virtual network gateway
  - A Connection

  There are several ways to ensure you have a fault-tolerant configuration:

  - Active/standby * are two VPN gateways. One of them is active while the other is standby for when the first one goes down.
  - Active/Active * are two or more active VPN gateways. This will make sure that the current solution is always online.
  - ExpressRoute failover * have more resiliency built in, but still aren't immune to physical problems like cables.
  - Zone-redundant gateways * are VPN gateways deployed in availability zones.

- ExpressRoute lets you extend your on-premises networks into the Microsoft cloud over a private connection with the help of a connectivity provider. With ExpressRoute, you can establish connections to Microsoft cloud services, such as Microsoft Azure and Microsoft 365. ExpressRoute connections don't go over the public Internet. This is one of the security considerations when choosing a VPN.

- You should know the two different layers of the Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) model:

  - Layer 2 (L2): This layer is the Data Link Layer, which provides node-to-node communication between two nodes on the same network.
  - Layer 3 (L3): This layer is the Network Layer, which provides addressing and routing between nodes on a multi-node network.

- There are several benefits to using ExpressRoute as the connection service between Azure and on-premises networks:
  - Layer 3 connectivity between your on-premises network and the Microsoft Cloud through a connectivity provider. Connectivity can be from an any-to-any (IPVPN) network, a point-to-point Ethernet connection, or through a virtual cross-connection via an Ethernet exchange.
  - Connectivity to Microsoft cloud services across all regions in the geopolitical region.
  - Global connectivity to Microsoft services across all regions with the ExpressRoute premium add-on.
  - Dynamic routing between your network and Microsoft via BGP.
  - Built-in redundancy in every peering location for higher reliability.
  - Connection uptime SLA.
  - QoS support for Skype for Business.

- ExpressRoute has multiple connectivity models:
  - **CloudExchange collocation**: Offer both Layer 2 and Layer 3 connections between your infrastructure, which might be located in the colocation facility, and the Microsoft cloud.
  - **Point-to-point Ethernet connection**: Provide Layer 2 and Layer 3 connectivity between your on-premises site and Azure. You can connect your offices or datacenters to Azure by using the point-to-point links
  - **Any-to-any connection**: integrates with your WAN connection to provide a connection like you would have between your datacenter and any branch offices.
