# Azure Fundamentals part 3: Describe core solutions and management tools on Azure

This is the third chapter of the online Microsoft Azure Fundamentals course.

## Choose the best Azure IoT service for your application

IoT bridges the physical and digital worlds by enabling devices with sensors and an internet connection to communicate with cloud-based systems via the internet.

### Identify the IoT options

- IoT enables devices to gather and then relay information for data analysis (most of the time with sensors).
- Azure IoT services has a specific endpoint for devices to send that information.
- It's also possible to manage (updating software/firmware) the devices by Azure.
- Combine this with __Azure AI services__ to predict when machines need maintenance.

There are multiple services that can help you in the AI area on Azure:

- **Azure IoT Hub**: a managed service that's hosted in the cloud and that acts as a central message hub for bi-directional communication between your IoT application and the devices it manages.
  - Supports communications both from the device to the cloud and from the cloud to device.
  - Able to route messages to other Azure services
  - Allows __command and control__ in the cloud to device routing.

- **Azure IoT Central**: builds on top of IoT Hub by adding a dashboard that allows you to connect, monitor, and manage your IoT devices.
  - Has an interface to connect new devices.
  - Watch overall performance and set notifications.
  - Can control devices remotely by interface.
  - Comes with device templates for quick starts (without server-side coding).

- **Azure Sphere**: creates an end-to-end, highly secure IoT solution for customers that encompasses everything from the hardware and operating system on the device to the secure method of sending messages from the device to the message hub. This comes in three parts:
  - The Azure Sphere micro-controller unit (MCU) which can be seen as the motherboard.
  - A customized Linux operating system (OS) for communication with the security service.
  - Azure Sphere Security Service, known as AS3. Checks with certificate-based authentication if the device is not tampered with when connecting to Azure.

  After these parts, the Azure Sphere system can interact with other Azure IoT services by sending telemetry and error information.

### Analyzing the decision criteria for IoT

But how do we determine which IoT service to choose? Most of the decisions come down to the security and if we want an integrated dashboard.

See the following table:
|                   | Dashboard | Security | Dashboard + Security | Nothing |
|-------------------|-----------|----------|----------------------|---------|
| Azure IoT Hub     |           |          |                      |    x    |
| Azure IoT Central |     x     |          |           x          |         |
| Azure Sphere      |           |     x    |           x          |         |

## Choose the best AI service for your needs

Artificial Intelligence (AI) is a category of computing that adapts and improves its decision-making ability over time based on its successes and failures. Microsoft Azure provides several AI solutions to choose from, each one depending on the problem you're trying to solve.

### Identify the AI options

- AI is a broad classification of computing that allows a software system to perceive its environment and take action that maximizes its chance of successfully achieving its goals.
- There are two basic approaches for AI:
  - **Deep learning**: Modeled on the neural network of the human mind, enabling it to discover, learn, and grow through experience.
  - **Machine learning**: Data science technique that uses existing data to train a model, test it, and then apply the model to new data to forecast future behaviors, outcomes, and trends.

There are three primary products offered by Microsoft:

- **Azure Machine Learning**: Consists of tools and services that allow you to connect to data to train and test models to find one that will most accurately predict a future result. After you've run experiments to test the model, you can deploy and use it in real time via a web API endpoint. Mostly used when you want complete control over the design and training of an algorithm
  - Create a process on how to work with your data (like obtaining and handling missing data).
  - Training and evaluating data.
  - Creating pipelines for running experiments to score algorithms on the defined training/test data.
  - Deploying the algorithm to an API as endpoint.

- **Azure Cognitive Services**: Provides prebuilt machine learning models that enable applications to see, hear, speak, understand, and even begin to reason. While you still need your own data, __Azure Cognitive Services__ comes already with pretrained models.

  There are multiple categories:

  - **Language services**: Process natural language.
  - **Speech services**: Converting speech into text and text into natural-sounding speech.
  - **Vision services**: Adds recognition and identification capabilities for pictures, videos, etc.
  - **Decision services**: More like personalized recommendations that automatically improve each time they are used.

- **Azure Bot Services and Bot Framework**: Platforms for creating virtual agents that understand and reply to questions just like a human. Behind the scenes, the bot you build uses other Azure services, such as Azure Cognitive Services, to understand what their human counterparts are asking for.

### Analyzing the decision criteria for AI

But how do we determine which AI service to choose? There are a few decisions to be made here, like "should it understand images" or "should it create personalized recommendations".

See the following table:
|                          | Connect with Humans | Doing general purpose tasks | Do something never done before |
|--------------------------|---------------------|-----------------------------|--------------------------------|
| Azure Machine Learning   |                     |                             |                x               |
| Azure Cognitive Services |                     |              x              |                                |
| Azure Bot Services       |          x          |                             |                                |

---

Extra note on the decision criteria:

- Keep in mind that everything done inside __Azure Cognitive Services__ can be done inside __Azure Machine Learning__.
- Using private historical data (or let's say, big complex models) to recommend stuff to users should always be combined with __Azure Machine Learning__.
