# Azure Fundamentals part 4: Describe general security and network security features

This is the fourth chapter of the online Microsoft Azure Fundamentals course.

## Protect against security threats on Azure

Security is a small word for a significant concept. There are so many factors to consider in order to protect your applications and your data. How does Azure help you protect workloads that you run in the cloud and in your on-premises datacenter?

### Protect against security threats by using Azure Security Center

Azure Security Center is a monitoring service that provides visibility of your security posture across all of your services, both on Azure and on-premises. The term *security posture* refers to cybersecurity policies and controls, as well as how well you can predict, prevent, and respond to security threats.

It can be used for:

- *Monitor* security settings across on-premises and cloud workloads.
- Automatically *apply required security settings* to new resources as they come online.
- Provide *security recommendations* that are based on your current configurations, resources, and networks.
- Continuously *monitor your resources* and perform automatic security assessments to identify potential vulnerabilities before those vulnerabilities can be exploited.
- Use *machine learning* to detect and block malware from being installed on your virtual machines (VMs) and other resources. You can also use adaptive application controls to define rules that list allowed applications to ensure that only applications you allow can run.
- *Detect and analyze potential inbound attacks* and investigate threats and any post-breach activity that might have occurred.
- Provide *just-in-time access control for network ports*.

Two other niece features are:

- Viewing its overall *regulatory compliance* from a security perspective all from one place.
- Viewing the *Resource security hygiene section*, the health of its resources from a security perspective can been seen.
- Viewing the *Secure Score* (based on security controls, or groups of related security recommendations) can also give you an security insight.

The Security Center has some threat protection:

- **Just-in-time VM access**: This access blocks traffic by default to specific network ports of VMs, but allows traffic for a specified time when an admin requests and approves it.
- **Adaptive application controls**: In the background, Security Center uses machine learning to look at the processes running on a VM. It creates exception rules for each resource group that holds the VMs and provides recommendations. This process provides alerts that inform the company about unauthorized applications that are running on its VMs.
- **Adaptive network hardening**: Security Center can monitor the internet traffic patterns of the VMs, and compare those patterns with the company's current network security group (NSG) settings. From there, Security Center can make recommendations about whether the NSGs should be locked down further and provide remediation steps.
- **File integrity monitoring**: Monitor changes of important files on both Windows and Linux, registry settings, applications, and other aspects that might indicate a security attack.

But what if it goes wrong:

- You can manually review all alerts and investigate them further.
- Using *workflow automation* (see Azure Logic Apps), you can automate this process (like sending mails etc.).

### Detect and respond to security threats by using Azure Sentinel

Security management on a large scale can benefit from a dedicated **security information and event management** (SIEM) system. A SIEM system aggregates security data from many different sources (as long as those sources support an open-standard logging format). It also provides capabilities for threat detection and response. Azure Sentinel is a SIEM platform created by Microsoft.

The platform can do the following:

- Collect cloud data at scale across all users, devices, applications
- Detect previously undetected threats
- Investigate threats with artificial intelligence
- Respond to incidents rapidly with built-in orchestration and automation of common tasks.

You can connect it to multiple data sources to analyse security events. For example:

- Connectors provide real-time integration for *Microsoft services* like Microsoft Threat Protection solutions, Microsoft 365 sources (including Office 365), Azure Active Directory, and Windows Defender Firewall.
- Connectors are available for common *non-Microsoft services and solutions*, including AWS CloudTrail, Citrix Analytics (Security), Sophos XG Firewall, VMware Carbon Black Cloud, and Okta SSO.
- Azure Sentinel supports data from *other sources* that use the Common Event Format (CEF) messaging standard, Syslog, or REST API.

It can detect threats by using templates. There are two kinds of templates available:

- **Build in analytics**: Designed by Microsoft's team of security experts and analysts based on known threats, common attack vectors, and escalation chains for suspicious activity.
- **Custom analytics**: Rules that you create to search for specific criteria within your environment. You can preview the number of results that the query would generate (based on past log events) and set a schedule for the query to run. You can also set an alert threshold.

If a problem arises, you can investigate specific alerts or *incidents* (a group of related alerts) in a *investigation graph*. But instead of manually detecting all this, you can use the **Azure Monitor Workbook** to automate responses to threats. For example:

1. When the alert is triggered, open a ticket in the IT ticketing system.
2. Send a message to the security operations channel in Microsoft Teams or Slack to make sure the security analysts are aware of the incident.
3. Send all of the information in the alert to the senior network admin and to the security admin. The email message includes two user option buttons: Block or Ignore.
