# Azure Fundamentals part 6: Describe Azure cost management and service level agreements

This is the sixth chapter of the online Microsoft Azure Fundamentals course.

## Plan and manage your Azure costs

Running in the datacenter requires you to maintain a facility and purchase, power, cool, and maintain your servers. Running in the cloud presents new ways to think about your IT expenses.

To answer the question of how much it will cost, you need to understand the factors that influence cost. You also need to understand what tools are available to you to help estimate and manage your cloud spend.

### Compare costs by using the Total Cost of Ownership Calculator

The **TCO (Total Cost of Ownership) Calculator** helps you estimate the cost savings of operating your solution on Azure over time, instead of in your on-premises datacenter. By entering your details of your on-premises workload and operation costs (like IT people and electricity), it will give you a comparison of Azure and on-premises. *No subscription is needed to use this calculator*.

It works in three steps:

- First you need to **define your workload**:
  - Servers
  - Databases
  - Storage
  - Networking
- Secondly, you need to **adjust your assumptions**:
  - Checking if your on-premises licenses are enrolled for *Software Assurance*, which can save you money by reusing those licenses on Azure.
  - Do you need greater redundancy by replicating storage in other Azure regions?
  - Cost assumptions:
    - Electricity price per kilowatt hour (KWh).
    - Hourly pay rate for IT administration.
    - Network maintenance cost as a percentage of network hardware and software costs.
- At last, you can **view the report** over a specified time range.

### Purchase Azure services

Azure offers both *free and paid subscription options* to fit your needs and requirements. They are:

- **Free trial**: Provides you with 12 months of popular free services, a credit to explore any Azure service for 30 days, and more than 25 services that are always free.
- **Pay-as-you-go**: Enables you to pay for what you use by attaching a credit or debit card to your account.
- **Member offers**: Existing memberships of certain Microsoft products and services might provide you with credits for your Azure account and reduced rates on Azure services.

You can purchase the services by:

- An **Enterprise Agreement**:
  - Large customers.
  - Spending predetermined amount on Azure services over a period of three years.
  - Paid annually.
- Directly from the web (**Web Direct**):
  - For everyone.
  - Billed monthly for services used.
- Through a **Cloud Solution Provider**:
  - For people that build solutions on top of Azure.
  - Billed for price determined by CSP.
  - CSP answers support questions for you.

There are certain factors that affect the costs:

- **Resource type** stands for what resource you used and how you customized it (different performance tiers, access tiers, ect.).
- **Usage meters** stands for the variables that determine your price. This varies between resources. A VM for example is tracked with CPU time, incoming and outgoing network traffic, etc.
- **Resource usage** stands for how long you are using the resource. You can deallocate the resource so you can pick it up later, but you still pay for the space it takes up. Deleting a resource will prepare it for another customer but you won't pay for it anymore.
- **Azure subscription types** stands for the different types of subscriptions, described in the section above.
- **Azure Marketplace** stands for application purchased from a third-party vendor in the marketplace.

It's also important to keep track of the location/network traffic:

- Different regions can have different associated prices. Because geographic regions can impact where your network traffic flows, network traffic is a cost influence to consider as well.
- Bandwidth refers to data moving in and out of Azure datacenters. Some inbound data transfers (data going into Azure datacenters) are free. For outbound data transfers (data leaving Azure datacenters), data transfer pricing is based on zones (like groups of regions).

### Manage and minimize total cost on Azure

These are the recommended practices that can help you minimize your costs:

- **Understand estimated costs before you deploy** by using the *TCO calculator* and the *pricing* calculator. Only add the products, services and resources that you need.
- **Use Azure Advisor to monitor your usage** to cut down some costs by following recommendations. These recommendations are sorted by impact and sometimes even Azure itself can fix these problems for you.
- **Use spending limits to restrict your spending**. Assign a certain spending limit, so you can't go over it.
- **Use Azure Reservations to prepay**, saving up to 72% compared to pay-as-you-go prices. The only thing you need to do for this is saying that you are going to use a service for a x-year term.
- **Choose low-cost locations and regions**, but remember that some resources are metered and billed according to how much outgoing (egress) network bandwidth they consume.
- **Research available cost-saving offers** and apply them where it's possible.
- **Use Azure Cost Management + Billing to control spending**. This is a free services that helps you understand your Azure bill, manage your account and subscriptions, monitor and control Azure spending, and optimize resource use. It includes:
  - Reporting
  - Data enrichment
  - Budgets
  - Alerting
  - Recommendations
- **Apply tags to identify cost owners**. They can help you manage costs associated with the different groups of Azure products and resources. It's easier to identify groups that generate the biggest Azure costs, which can help you adjust your spending accordingly.
- **Resize underutilized virtual machines** if they are not using their full capacity. This can reduce the costs of one VM by a lot. But keep in mind that resizing a VM requires it to be stopped, resized, and then restarted. This process might take a few minutes depending on how significant the size change is.
- **Deallocate virtual machines during off hours**. This is especially useful with development and testing environments.
- **Delete unused resources**.
- **Migrate from IaaS to PaaS services**. Because IaaS uses a lot more (the entire environment), it also costs more. But if you are for example only using a SQL server on the IaaS service, it should be better to move this to a PaaS service.
- **Save on licensing costs**. For example:
  - Using Linux instead of Windows.
  - Repurpose Windows Server or SQL Server licencees that are covered by *Software Assurance*.

## Choose the right Azure services by examining SLAs and service lifecycle

Moving to the cloud removes the burden of supporting IT infrastructure. When network connectivity is lost or a hard drive fails, you rely on the cloud provider to restore service.

### What are service-level agreements (SLAs)?

A **service-level agreement (SLA)** is a formal agreement between a service company and the customer. For Azure, this agreement defines the performance standards that Microsoft commits to for you, the customer. **A free service does not typically have an SLA.**

**Each Azure service defines its own SLA.** In such a SLA, the following will be described:

- **Introduction**: What to expect from the SLA, including its scope and how subscription renewals can affect the terms.
- **General terms**: Consists of two parts:
  - A vocabulary with terms that are used throughout the SLA.
  - A general terms of agreement on how to submit a clain, receive credit for issues and limitations to the agreement.
- **SLA details**: Defines specific guarantees for the service like the *uptime* (99.9 to 99.99 percent) and other factors like *latency*.

A **service credit** is the percentage of the fees you paid that are credited back to you according to the claim approval process. This can happen if the service fails to perform to its SLA specification. For many services, you must submit your claim by the end of the calendar month following the month in which the incident occurred.

### Define your application SLA

An *application SLA* defines the SLA requirements for a specific application. This term typically refers to an application that you build on Azure.

Microsoft divides this into three sections:

- **The business impact**. What happens when the app goes down?
- **Effect on other business operations**. Does the app rely (or do other apps rely) on this application?
- **Usage patterns**. When and how users access your application?

### Design your application to meet your SLA

You can design a SLA that has 99.9% uptime. Problem is that if you are using multiple services, the downtime can vary. To determine what the combined uptime is, we need to identify the workload.

A **workload** is a distinct capability or task that's logically separated from other tasks, in terms of business logic and data storage requirements. Each workload defines a set of requirements for availability, scalability, data consistency, and disaster recovery.

Lets say we want to have the following services:
|         Service        |   SLA  |
|:----------------------:|:------:|
| Azure Virtual Machines |  99.9% |
|   Azure SQL Database   | 99.99% |
|   Azure Load Balancer  | 99.99% |

This will result in a composite SLA (two virtual machines):
> 99.9% × 99.9% × 99.99% × 99.99% = 0.999 × 0.999 × 0.9999 × 0.9999 = 0.9978 = 99.78%

To increase this total number you can do the following:

- Upgrade a workload. For example the VM has multiple tiers available. You can upgrade disks to ensure a better SLA.
- Using a paid tier instead of the free tier. Sometimes you need to switch over to a paid tier to ensure a better SLA, because free tiers mostly don't have one.
- Deploying across different availability zones. This will ensure that when one zone is affected, the services in the other zone are not.

Deploying two or more instances of an Azure virtual machine across two or more availability zones raises the virtual machine SLA to 99.99 percent. If added to the calculation above, we get:
> 99.99% × 99.99% × 99.99% × 99.99% = 0.9999 × 0.9999 × 0.9999 × 0.9999 = 0.9996 = 99.96%

The last way of not increasing your SLA, but upgrading your uptime is by using **redundancy**. This means that you duplicate components across several regions. To achieve max availability in your application, you need to add redundancy to every part of the application. This is not recommended because it can make it very complex and expensive.

### Access preview services and preview features

The service lifecycle defines how every Azure service is released for public use. Be careful that not every preview is covered by customer support and they should not be used for business-critical workloads. There are three phases:

- **Development phase.**
- **Public preview phase.**
- **Production-ready phase (general availability (GA)).**

To access these preview features you can access the Azure Preview Portal. Some services also have new preview functionality that can be enabled per service.
To stay up-to-date with these versions, you can go to the Azure update page that will provide a overview of all the services that are in development, public preview or that are now available.
